--- Page 1 ---
Citation: Zhao, K.; Duan, Y.; Chen, J.;
Li, Q.; Hong, X.; Zhang, R.; Wang, M.
Detection of Respiratory Rate of
Dairy Cows Based on Infrared
Thermography and Deep Learning.
Agriculture 2023, 13, 1939.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
agriculture13101939
Academic Editors: Xiuliang Jin, Hao
Yang, Zhenhai Li, Changping Huang
and Dameng Yin
Received: 8 September 2023
Revised: 28 September 2023
Accepted: 30 September 2023
Published: 4 October 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
agriculture 
Article
Detection of Respiratory Rate of Dairy Cows Based on Infrared
Thermography and Deep Learning
Kaixuan Zhao 1,2 , Yijie Duan 1,2 , Junliang Chen 3, Qianwen Li 1,*, Xing Hong 1,2 , Ruihong Zhang 1,2
and Meijia Wang 4
1 College of Agricultural Equipment Engineering, Henan University of Science and Technology,
Luoyang 471023, China; kx.zhao@haust.edu.cn (K.Z.)
2 Science & Technology Innovation Center for Completed Set Equipment, Longmen Laboratory,
Luoyang 471023, China
3 College of Food & Bioengineering, Henan University of Science and Technology, Luoyang 471023, China
4 School of Electronic Information and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Shaanxi University of Science & Technology,
Xi’an 710021, China; meijiawang@sust.edu.cn
* Correspondence: liqianwen@haust.edu.cn
Abstract: The respiratory status of dairy cows can reﬂect their heat stress and health conditions.
It is widely used in the precision farming of dairy cows. To realize intelligent monitoring of cow
respiratory status, a system based on infrared thermography was constructed. First, the YOLO v8
model was used to detect and track the nose of cows in thermal images. Three instance segmentation
models, Mask2Former, Mask R-CNN and SOLOv2, were used to segment the nostrils from the nose
area. Second, the hash algorithm was used to extract the temperature of each pixel in the nostril area
of a cow to obtain the temperature change curve. Finally, the sliding window approach was used
to detect the peaks of the ﬁltered temperature curve to obtain the respiratory rate of cows. Totally
81 infrared thermography videos were used to test the system, and the results showed that the AP50
of nose detection reached 98.6%, and the AP50 of nostril segmentation reached 75.71%. The accuracy
of the respiratory rate was 94.58%, and the correlation coefﬁcient R was 0.95. Combining infrared
thermography technology with deep learning models can improve the accuracy and usability of the
respiratory monitoring system for dairy cows.
Keywords: infrared thermography; respiratory rate; nostril segmentation; dairy cows
1. Introduction
The respiratory behaviour of dairy cows is closely related to their health status, and the
respiratory rate (RR) of healthy dairy cows is approximately 12 to 28 times per minute [1].
When the RR ﬂuctuates abnormally, it may be closely related to cow disease, shed comfort,
environmental temperature, etc. [2–4]. Automatic monitoring of the breathing behavior
of cows not only helps breeders grasp the health status of cows, but also ensures the
production performance of cows and farm beneﬁts [ 5]. The detection of the respiratory
behavior of cows is mainly completed by manual counting, which has high labor and
time costs and low accuracy [ 6]. Therefore, it is important to realize the intelligent and
automatic monitoring of dairy cow respiration to maintain the production performance of
dairy cows and promote the development of precision breeding [7]. Today’s respiratory
status monitoring methods are mainly divided into contact and noncontact methods [8,9].
For contact detection of breathing behaviour, Eigenberg et al. (2000) ﬁxed a ﬁlm pressure
sensor on the abdomen of dairy cows with a belt, which recorded the regular ﬂuctuations
of the abdomen. In a direct sunlight environment, when the temperature changed by
1◦C, the RR change in dairy cows was 6.6 times/min [ 10]. Milan et al. (2016) ﬁxed the
temperature sensor near the nostril of the cow with a halter to monitor the temperature
change in the air near the nostril of the cow and calculated the breathing rate according
Agriculture 2023, 13, 1939. https://doi.org/10.3390/agriculture13101939 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/agriculture

--- Page 2 ---
Agriculture 2023, 13, 1939 2 of 15
to the number of oscillations of the temperature signal [6]. Strutzke et al. (2019) designed
a cow contact breathing monitoring device based on a differential pressure sensor. This
method was highly correlated with manual counting results in three different states of cows:
sleeping (correlation coefﬁcient, R = 0.92), lying down (R = 0.98), and standing (R = 0.99) [11].
Although the technology of respiratory status monitoring methods based on contact sensors
is mature, it is difﬁcult to apply in practice because of the poor compliance of dairy cows,
the complex environment, and many interference factors. In addition, the contact sensor
easily causes the stress response of cows, affecting animal welfare. Noncontact respiratory
status monitoring does not easily cause a stress response in dairy cows because of its fast
response and ﬂexible installation; this method is favoured by an increasing number of
researchers and is an important development direction of intelligent respiratory status
monitoring of dairy cows [12].
For noncontact detection of breathing behaviour, Tang Liang et al. (2015) used machine
vision technology to detect the breathing rate of pigs by assessing the changes in their
abdominal area while breathing. The results from 10 test videos with low interference
showed that the RR detection accuracy of this method could reach 92.0% [13]. Benetazzo
et al. (2014) collected and calculated the distance between the chest and the camera based on
the Kinect depth camera to detect breathing behaviour. Five sets of test results in different
environments show that this method is a feasible alternative for breath detection [14]. Zhao
Kaixuan et al. (2014) calculated the relative movement speed of each pixel point of a video
frame image by using a Horn–Schunck optical ﬂow method, screened out breathing motion
points in the pixel points by using cyclic Otsu algorithm, dynamically calculated the period
of a speed direction curve, calculated the RR of the cow and further judged whether the cow
breathing was abnormal. The accuracy rate of RR detection was 95.68% and the success rate
of abnormal detection was 89.06% [15]. Zeng et al. (2020) proposed a breathing detection
system based on WIFI, which uses multiple antennas on the router to receive the object
reﬂection signal and extract and perceive the object breathing signal through blind source
separation and independent component analysis [16].
In the above methods, the costs of the depth camera and the requirements for the
compliance of a detection object and the environment are relatively high. The Horn–Sch-
unck optical ﬂow method is computationally expensive, and its detection speed and real-
time performance are not good. In dairy farms, the environment is complex, and the noise
is serious, so it is not suitable to use WIFI for breath detection. Infrared thermography
(IRT) [17] is a noncontact method that has been validated for the measurement of RR in
adult dairy cattle [18]. In this study, to achieve accurate, rapid, and automatic monitoring
of the respiratory status of dairy cows, a system based on IRT was proposed. First, a YOLO
v8 object detection model was used to train a detector of a cow’s nose in IRT images and
three kinds of instance segmentation models were used to segment the nostrils from the
nose area. Second, the hash algorithm was used to extract the temperature of each pixel in
the nostril area of the cow to obtain the temperature change curve. Finally, the temperature
change curve was ﬁltered, the wave crest was detected, and the RR was obtained. This
method can provide a reference for the accurate and automatic detection of RR and realize
automatic monitoring.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. T est Data
2.1.1. Data Acquisition
The experimental video was collected in Nanyang Sansege Dairy Farm, China, on a
sunny day in July 2021. The experimental objects were Holstein cows with an average age
of 26 months, that were in lactation and had no history of respiratory disease. The cows did
not drink water for half an hour before image acquisition. The temperature of the barn was
around 32◦C and the humidity was 65%. When a cow ruminates, it will stretch its head
out of the railing, and the individual activity is relatively stable. The FLIR A615 infrared
thermal camera was ﬁxed at a distance of 1.9 m from the cow object and 0.75 m from the

--- Page 3 ---
Agriculture 2023, 13, 1939 3 of 15
ground. During the cow ruminating process, the camera recorded the videos of ﬁve cows:
the collection time of each cow was approximately 3 min, the total time was approximately
15 min, the frame rate of the video was 25 frames per second (FPS), and the total frame
was 22,485. The video resolution is 640 pixels (horizontal)× 480 pixels (vertical), and the
shooting took place under natural lighting conditions.
2.1.2. Dataset Production
The preparation process of the test dataset is as follows:
1. Data preprocessing: approximately 15 min of video is cut into 10 s of video data,
totalling 92 segments;
2. Picture acquisition: each frame picture is extracted from the recorded IRT video ﬁle,
and the picture is saved in a JPG format;
3. Dividing the dataset: to better train the parameters and predict the performance of
the model, the dataset is divided into a training set and a test set at a ratio of 7:3 by
random sampling. The training set is used as a training object to extract the neural
network model. When the amount of data in the training set is sufﬁcient, it is helpful
to enhance the recognition ability of the model application. The test set is used to
verify the accuracy of the model.
4. Data labelling: the nose, left nostril, and right nostril of the cow in each frame
image of the training set are manually labelled. After the picture is annotated, a
corresponding ﬁle is generated, which records the annotated area, object category,
and other information;
5. Dataset format: the ﬁle is converted into a standard format dataset for model training
and testing.
2.2. Nostril Detection Based on Cascaded Deep Learning
2.2.1. Nose Detection Based on YOLO V8
Intelligent video surveillance technology has been widely used in intelligent breeding,
and it has become a research hotspot in the ﬁeld of agricultural engineering to improve
the level of dairy cow behavior monitoring by using computer vision technology [19]. To
realize the automatic monitoring of a cow’s respiratory status in video images, accurate
nose positioning is essential.
Nose detection refers to locating the position of a cow’s nose from an IRT image. To
facilitate subsequent algorithm development and RR detection, the ﬁrst part is to detect the
object in the IRT images and extract the cow’s nose as the basis for further analysis.
YOLO (you only look once) [20] is a general object detection model based on a con-
volutional neural network. It is characterized by using regression ideas to predict the
rectangular frame of the detected object during detection, so it can greatly improve the
computational efﬁciency compared with other detection methods that need a selective
search to extract a large number of candidate areas. YOLO v8 is the latest version of the
YOLO series models, providing a new SOTA model, replacing the C3 structure of YOLO v5
with a C2f structure with richer gradient ﬂow, which greatly improves model performance.
The model can complete the tasks of object detection, instance segmentation, and image
classiﬁcation, and the loss function of the model adopts the positive sample allocation
strategy. The model is faster and more accurate. At the same time, the data enhancement
part of the training introduces the operation of turning off Mosaic enhancement in the last
10 epochs of YOLO X, which can effectively improve accuracy.
Therefore, YOLO v8 (you only look once v8) [21], an object detection model based on a
deep learning neural network, is selected in this paper because of its detection accuracy and
efﬁciency. As a detector of a cow’s nose, the detection result is represented by a rectangular
box in the image. In addition, even if the nose can be accurately detected, how to obtain the
breath temperature ﬂow is still a signiﬁcant problem. Therefore, it is necessary to further
analyse the results of nose object detection.

--- Page 4 ---
Agriculture 2023, 13, 1939 4 of 15
The model training parameters are set as follows: (1) The batch size is 8 with
10,000 iterations, the initial learning rate is 0.01, with 3000 warm-up iterations, optimizer
is SGD, and the learning rate schedule is linear; (2) the input image width and height
of the network are 640 pixels× 480 pixels; and (3) the hardware platform conﬁguration
for model training involves one NVIDIA GTX 2080 Ti graphics card (Nvidia Corporation,
Santa Clara, CA, USA) with 16 GB memory and one Intel ® Core ™ i5-10400F processor
(Intel Corporation, Santa Clara, CA, USA).
2.2.2. Nostril Segmentation Based on Deep Learning
With the deepening of research, only obtaining the nose position is far from meeting
the needs of precise breeding. Therefore, it is important to accurately obtain the nostril
information of dairy cows to improve the level of respiratory status monitoring.
In this paper, the instance segmentation algorithm is introduced to obtain the nostril
area. In recent years, with the rapid development of deep learning technology, E2EC,
Mask R-CNN, YOLO v1-v8 and other semantic segmentation, instance segmentation or
object detection networks have been proposed. Among them, the object detection speed is
relatively fast, but the object and part of the background will be selected at the same time, so
additional processing is needed [22]. Semantic segmentation and instance segmentation can
directly obtain more accurate contour information. Instance segmentation is an advanced
task that combines object detection and semantic segmentation. It not only needs to
distinguish different instances but also needs to mark them with masks. This can further
distinguish different individuals of the same category, but it is also more time consuming.
The development of instance segmentation started with Mask RCNN [23].
Mask2Former is a new architecture capable of handling any image segmentation task
(panoramic, instance, or semantic). Its key components include hidden attention, which
extracts local features by constraining cross-attention within the predicted mask area. In ad-
dition to reducing the research effort by at least a factor of three, it signiﬁcantly outperforms
the best-dedicated architectures on four popular datasets. Most notably, Mask2Former has
proposed new and more advanced techniques for panoramic segmentation (57.8 PQ on
COCO), instance segmentation (50.1 AP on COCO), and semantic segmentation (57.7 mIOU
on ADE20K) [24].
To better obtain the temperature change information in the nostril area of dairy cows,
this study uses the method of extracting the object from each frame image and calculating
the temperature of the nostril area of each frame image to complete respiratory status
monitoring.
2.3. T emperature Extraction of the Nostril Area Based on the Hash Algorithm
When a cow breathes, the temperature of the nostril area will change regularly with
the change in respiratory status. During inhalation, cool air is drawn in from the envi-
ronment, resulting in a cooling of the nostrils and a subsequent darker appearance of the
nostrils in infrared recordings. In contrast, during exhalation, warm air is expelled into
the environment, resulting in a warming of the nostrils and a subsequent warmer reading
with a brighter appearance of the nostrils in infrared recordings. According to the obtained
information of the nostril area of the cow, the temperature of each pixel in the nostril area
of each frame image when the cow breathes is obtained by using the hash algorithm. The
speciﬁc steps are shown in Figure 1.
RGB is a common colour space, and its colour mode includes three colour channels:
red (R), green (G), and blue (B). The “colour space” for any colour can be deﬁned as a ﬁxed
number or variable. Among them, the methods of coding a colour are collectively referred
to as “colour space”. In this experiment, the RGB value of each pixel has its corresponding
colour coding.
According to the colour–temperature scale on the right side of the sampled video, the
temperature value is determined by obtaining the mapping relationship between the RGB
value of each pixel in the scale and the temperature and applying a hash algorithm. A hash

--- Page 5 ---
Agriculture 2023, 13, 1939 5 of 15
map can map one value to another through a certain functional relationship. The hash
map has the advantages of high efﬁciency, fast searching, insert and delete operations, and
relatively easy programming. The disadvantage is that it is based on arrays, which are
difﬁcult to extend after they are created.
Agriculture 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 16 
 
 
Obtain the nostril 
area coordinates
Obtain the nostril 
area color
Calculate the hash 
map table of color 
and temperature
Hit color
Get 
temperature 
data
Computed 
nearest color
Y
N
 
Figure 1. Temperature extraction process of the nostril area. 
RGB is a common colour space, and its colour mode includes three colour channels: 
red (R), green (G), and blue (B). The “colour space” for any colour can be deﬁned as a ﬁxed 
number or variable. Among them, the methods of coding a colour are collectively referred 
to as “colour space”. In this experiment, the RGB value of each pixel has its corresponding 
colour coding. 
According to the colour–temperature scale on the right side of the sampled video, the 
temperature value is determined by obtaining the mapping relationship between the RGB 
value of each pixel in the scale and the te mperature and applying a hash algorithm. A 
hash map can map one value to another thro ugh a certain functional relationship. The 
hash map has the advantages of high e ﬃciency, fast searching, insert and delete opera-
tions, and relatively easy programming. The disadvantage is that it is based on arrays, 
which are diﬃcult to extend after they are created. 
A portion of the pixels in the nostril area in each frame image can obtain the corre-
sponding temperature value by traversing the colour–temperature scale and using the 
hash table, but the RGB value in the colour–temperature scale cannot completely match 
the RGB value of each pixel. To calculate RR through the temperature change in the nostril 
area, this paper adopts the method of calculating the minimum distance between the RGB 
value that is not hit and the known RGB value in the colour–temperature scale to obtain 
the temperature corresponding to the RGB value that is not hit. 
The common distance measures are the Euclidean distance, Hamming distance, Man-
hattan distance, Chebyshev distance, Jaccard distance, etc. In this study, the classical Eu-
clidean distance is used to deal with the pixels that are not hit, and the Euclidean distance 
has the advantages of simplicity and rapidity. 
To obtain the distance between the colour pixel to be acquired and the known colour 
pixel, the Euclidean distance 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡
𝑎𝑘 between the colour vector (R, G, B) of pixel 𝑀𝑎 that 
is not hit and the colour vector (R, G, B) of pixel 𝑁𝑘 that is known in the colour–temper-
ature scale is calculated. Selecting a minimum value for the distance, the RGB value of the 
known pixel corresponding to the minimum value is the RGB value of the colour pixel to 
be obtained. 𝑀𝑎 is the a-th not hit pixel, 𝑁𝑘 is the k-th known pixel, 𝑀𝑎 and 𝑁𝑘 are 
three-channel RGB pixel points, and the calculation formula for 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑘 is as follows: 
𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑘 = ට൫𝑀𝑎
𝑟 −𝑁 𝑘
𝑟
൯
2
+ ൫𝑀𝑎
𝑔
−𝑁 𝑘
𝑔൯
2
+ ቀ𝑀𝑎
𝑏 −𝑁 𝑘
𝑏
ቁ
2
 (1)
In Formula (1), 𝑀𝑎
𝑟 , 𝑀𝑎
𝑔 and 𝑀𝑎
𝑏 are the R, G, and B components of the a-th not hit pixel, 
respectively, and 𝑁𝑘
𝑟 , 𝑁𝑘
𝑔
 and 𝑁𝑘
𝑏 are the R, G, and B components of the k-th known pixel, 
respectively. 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎1 , 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎2 , 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎3 ……𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑘 from 𝑀𝑎 to 𝑁1, 𝑁2, 𝑁3……𝑁𝑘 can be ob-
tained through Formula (1). The smallest of them ൫𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑘 ൯
𝑚𝑖𝑛
 is selected, corresponding 
to the known pixel 𝑁𝑘. The temperature value corresponding to 𝑀𝑎 is obtained by using 
the hash algorithm. 
By using the above method, the RGB value of each pixel in the nostril areas of each 
frame of IRT pictures can be obtained, and then the corresponding temperature value can 
be obtained. 
Figure 1. Temperature extraction process of the nostril area.
A portion of the pixels in the nostril area in each frame image can obtain the corre-
sponding temperature value by traversing the colour–temperature scale and using the
hash table, but the RGB value in the colour–temperature scale cannot completely match
the RGB value of each pixel. To calculate RR through the temperature change in the nostril
area, this paper adopts the method of calculating the minimum distance between the RGB
value that is not hit and the known RGB value in the colour–temperature scale to obtain
the temperature corresponding to the RGB value that is not hit.
The common distance measures are the Euclidean distance, Hamming distance, Man-
hattan distance, Chebyshev distance, Jaccard distance, etc. In this study, the classical
Euclidean distance is used to deal with the pixels that are not hit, and the Euclidean
distance has the advantages of simplicity and rapidity.
To obtain the distance between the colour pixel to be acquired and the known colour
pixel, the Euclidean distance dist ak between the colour vector (R, G, B) of pixel Ma that is
not hit and the colour vector (R, G, B) of pixel Nk that is known in the colour–temperature
scale is calculated. Selecting a minimum value for the distance, the RGB value of the
known pixel corresponding to the minimum value is the RGB value of the colour pixel
to be obtained. Ma is the a-th not hit pixel, Nk is the k-th known pixel, Ma and Nk are
three-channel RGB pixel points, and the calculation formula for dist ak is as follows:
dist ak =
√
(
Mra− Nr
k
)2 +
(
Mg
a− Ng
k
)2
+
(
Mba− Nb
k
)2
(1)
In Formula (1), Mr
a, Mg
a and Mb
a are the R, G, and B components of the a-th not hit
pixel, respectively, and Nr
k, Ng
k and Nb
k are the R, G, and B components of the k-th known
pixel, respectively. dist a1, dist a2, dist a3. . .. . .dist ak from Ma to N1, N2, N3. . .. . .Nk can be
obtained through Formula (1). The smallest of them
(
dist ak
)
min is selected, corresponding
to the known pixel Nk. The temperature value corresponding to Ma is obtained by using
the hash algorithm.
By using the above method, the RGB value of each pixel in the nostril areas of each
frame of IRT pictures can be obtained, and then the corresponding temperature value can
be obtained.
2.4. Detection of RR
This module processes the obtained temperature data and detects the RR of dairy
cows according to temperature changes.
The temperature extracted by the above method is a discrete signal consisting of the
average value of all temperatures in each frame. First, the signal is subjected to spectral
analysis by using a Fourier transform. Second, the data need to be ﬁltered. Finally, the RR
was measured by the temperature curve. The speciﬁc steps are shown in Figure 2.

--- Page 6 ---
Agriculture 2023, 13, 1939 6 of 15
Agriculture 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 16 
 
 
2.4. Detection of RR 
This module processes the obtained temper ature data and detects the RR of dairy 
cows according to temperature changes. 
The temperature extracted by the above method is a discrete signal consisting of the 
average value of all temperatures in each frame. First, the signal is subjected to spectral 
analysis by using a Fourier transform. Second, the data need to be ﬁltered. Finally, the RR 
was measured by the temperature curve. The speciﬁc steps are shown in Figure 2. 
Spectral 
Analysis Filter Mark Wave 
Peaks
Analyze The Temperature 
Change Curve Detect RR
 
Figure 2. Flow chart of the temperature change curve analysis. 
There are mainly four kinds of ﬁlters according to the characteristics and di ﬀerent 
applications of the ﬁlter: the Butterworth ﬁlter, Chebyshev I ﬁlter, Chebyshev II ﬁlter, and 
elliptic ﬁlter [25]. Among them, the Bu tterworth ﬁlter is a more commonly used signal 
processing ﬁlter, and its role is to make the frequency response of the signal as ﬂat as 
possible in the passband, so it is also called the maximum ﬂat amplitude ﬁlter. This ﬁlter 
is used in this test. A typical Butterworth ﬁlter is a low-pass ﬁlter. 
In this test, peaks are marked according to their prominence. The prominence of a 
peak measures how much the peak protrudes from the baseline around the signal and is 
deﬁned as the vertical distance between the peak and its lowest contour, called the prom-
inence of the peak (P), which is a measure of the independence of the peak. It can also be 
understood as the minimum height at which the peak needs to fall to reach a higher point. 
In this study, it was de ﬁned that a wave transformation with a small protrusion in the 
temperature change curve of dairy cows during respiration did not belong to a respiration 
process. In addition, the purpose of not marking a small wave peak could be achieved by 
setting the P value; that is, when the respiration temperature diﬀerence was less than the 
P value, it was not deﬁned as respiration. In this paper, the time of one breath is de ﬁned 
as the time between two adjacent peaks. Using the sliding window method to traverse the 
signal and mark each peak (extreme point), the number of peaks is the number of breaths. 
2.5. Evaluation Index of the Model 
To verify the accuracy of the respiratory status detection algorithm studied in this 
paper, two evaluation indices, the instance segmentation evaluation parameter average 
precision (AP) and accuracy ω, were used to evaluate the model performance. Note that 
for the nose, if the parallel cross-ratio (intersection over union, IOU) between the detection 
rectangular frame and the precalibrated real rectangular frame is greater than 0.5, then 
the detection is deﬁned as correct. 
The mean value of precision AP is used to measure the localization accuracy of nose 
detection and nostril instance segmentation in this study. The instance segmentation eval-
uation parameters AP and AP 50 in the model are selected. AP 50 refers to the measured 
value of AP when the IOU threshold is greater than 0.5. 
The accuracy of RR detections ω is used to verify the accuracy of the algorithm. In 
each test video, the actual number of breaths of the cow obtained through manual count-
ing is n1, and the number of breaths detected by the algorithm in this study is n2. The 
detection accuracy ω of this research algorithm is deﬁned, as shown in Formula (2): 
ω=( 1− |𝑛ଵ−𝑛 ଶ|
𝑛ଵ
) × 100% (2)
3. Results and Discussion 
3.1. Analysis of Test Results 
Figure 2. Flow chart of the temperature change curve analysis.
There are mainly four kinds of ﬁlters according to the characteristics and different
applications of the ﬁlter: the Butterworth ﬁlter, Chebyshev I ﬁlter, Chebyshev II ﬁlter, and
elliptic ﬁlter [25]. Among them, the Butterworth ﬁlter is a more commonly used signal
processing ﬁlter, and its role is to make the frequency response of the signal as ﬂat as
possible in the passband, so it is also called the maximum ﬂat amplitude ﬁlter. This ﬁlter is
used in this test. A typical Butterworth ﬁlter is a low-pass ﬁlter.
In this test, peaks are marked according to their prominence. The prominence of a peak
measures how much the peak protrudes from the baseline around the signal and is deﬁned
as the vertical distance between the peak and its lowest contour, called the prominence of
the peak (P), which is a measure of the independence of the peak. It can also be understood
as the minimum height at which the peak needs to fall to reach a higher point. In this
study, it was deﬁned that a wave transformation with a small protrusion in the temperature
change curve of dairy cows during respiration did not belong to a respiration process. In
addition, the purpose of not marking a small wave peak could be achieved by setting the
P value; that is, when the respiration temperature difference was less than the P value, it
was not deﬁned as respiration. In this paper, the time of one breath is deﬁned as the time
between two adjacent peaks. Using the sliding window method to traverse the signal and
mark each peak (extreme point), the number of peaks is the number of breaths.
2.5. Evaluation Index of the Model
To verify the accuracy of the respiratory status detection algorithm studied in this
paper, two evaluation indices, the instance segmentation evaluation parameter average
precision (AP) and accuracy ω, were used to evaluate the model performance. Note that
for the nose, if the parallel cross-ratio (intersection over union, IOU) between the detection
rectangular frame and the precalibrated real rectangular frame is greater than 0.5, then the
detection is deﬁned as correct.
The mean value of precision AP is used to measure the localization accuracy of nose
detection and nostril instance segmentation in this study. The instance segmentation
evaluation parameters AP and AP50 in the model are selected. AP50 refers to the measured
value of AP when the IOU threshold is greater than 0.5.
The accuracy of RR detections ω is used to verify the accuracy of the algorithm. In
each test video, the actual number of breaths of the cow obtained through manual counting
is n1, and the number of breaths detected by the algorithm in this study is n2. The detection
accuracy ω of this research algorithm is deﬁned, as shown in Formula (2):
ω =
(
1−|n1− n2|
n1
)
× 100% (2)
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Analysis of T est Results
3.1.1. Nose Object Detection Result
Figure 3 is an example of a cow’s nose detection result in a test set. In the ﬁgure, the
results of a cow’s nose detection is marked by blue rectangular boxes. Due to the high
detection accuracy of the YOLO v8 model, the cow nose in most of the images can be
accurately detected. However, in some special cases, such as fast motion leading to blurring
and other factors, there will still be some cases of missed detection. Alternatively, there is a
nose false alarm detection; that is, there is no nose in the picture but the nose is detected.

--- Page 7 ---
Agriculture 2023, 13, 1939 7 of 15
Agriculture 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 16 
 
 
3.1.1. Nose Object Detection Result 
Figure 3 is an example of a cow’s nose detection result in a test set. In the ﬁgure, the 
results of a cow’s nose detection is marked by blue rectangular boxes. Due to the high 
detection acc urac y of the YOLO v8 mo del, the cow nose in most of the image s can be 
accurately detected. However, in some special cases, such as fast motion leading to blur-
ring and other factors, there will still be so me cases of missed detection. Alternatively, 
there is a nose false alarm detection; that is, there is no nose in the picture but the nose is 
detected. 
 
Figure 3. Example of a cow’s nose object detection result. 
To verify the e ﬀectiveness of the proposed method , experiments are carried out on 
the test set. Then, the video is screened acco rding to the nose detection result in each 
video. If the nose is not detected in the video frame, it is considered that the nose is not in 
the ﬁeld of view in the frame. To avoid too large errors in RR detecting, if the total time of 
not detecting the nose in each video is more than 1 s, then the video is rejected. Finally, 11 
videos are eliminated, leaving 81 videos. Table 1 shows the results of cow nose detection 
using the YOLO v8 model. After analysis, th e reasons for the accuracy error are missing 
detection and false alarm detection, but the impact on accuracy is very small. Combined 
with Table 1, it can be seen that the YOLO v8 model can obtain ideal results in the detec-
tion of a cow’s nose. 
Table 1. Detection results of cows’ nose object. 
Algorithm AP 50 AP 75 AP 50–95 
YOLO v8 98.6 84.3 81.2 
3.1.2. Comparison of Instance Segmentation Algorithms 
To verify the reliability and stability of the Mask2Former network in nostril object 
extraction, Mask R-CNN and SOLOv2 [26], which are the mainstream instance segmenta-
tion algorithms at present, are selected. It is compared with Mask2Former, which is an 
instance segmentation algorithm used in this paper. Among them, Mask R-CNN belongs 
to the two-stage instance segmentation algorithm of “ ﬁrst detection and then segmenta-
tion”. In the comparison of the segmentation accuracy of many models, the average accu-
racy of the two-stage framework is better. This is because two-stage methods such as Mask 
R-CNN are more suitable for area-based detection; although the model framework is not 
ﬂexible, the training time is long and it is no t suitable for real-time applications [27]. The 
single-stage SOLOv2 model can perform segmentation and detection in parallel, so it can 
achieve good performance and reduce processing time, which is usually faster and more 
Figure 3. Example of a cow’s nose object detection result.
To verify the effectiveness of the proposed method, experiments are carried out on the
test set. Then, the video is screened according to the nose detection result in each video.
If the nose is not detected in the video frame, it is considered that the nose is not in the
ﬁeld of view in the frame. To avoid too large errors in RR detecting, if the total time of
not detecting the nose in each video is more than 1 s, then the video is rejected. Finally,
11 videos are eliminated, leaving 81 videos. Table 1 shows the results of cow nose detection
using the YOLO v8 model. After analysis, the reasons for the accuracy error are missing
detection and false alarm detection, but the impact on accuracy is very small. Combined
with Table 1, it can be seen that the YOLO v8 model can obtain ideal results in the detection
of a cow’s nose.
Table 1. Detection results of cows’ nose object.
Algorithm AP 50 AP75 AP50–95
YOLO v8 98.6 84.3 81.2
3.1.2. Comparison of Instance Segmentation Algorithms
To verify the reliability and stability of the Mask2Former network in nostril object ex-
traction, Mask R-CNN and SOLOv2 [26], which are the mainstream instance segmentation
algorithms at present, are selected. It is compared with Mask2Former, which is an instance
segmentation algorithm used in this paper. Among them, Mask R-CNN belongs to the
two-stage instance segmentation algorithm of “ﬁrst detection and then segmentation”. In
the comparison of the segmentation accuracy of many models, the average accuracy of the
two-stage framework is better. This is because two-stage methods such as Mask R-CNN are
more suitable for area-based detection; although the model framework is not ﬂexible, the
training time is long and it is not suitable for real-time applications [27]. The single-stage
SOLOv2 model can perform segmentation and detection in parallel, so it can achieve good
performance and reduce processing time, which is usually faster and more real-time than
two-stage [28]. However, it is difﬁcult to detect small objects in a single-stage framework,
and a two-stage framework is better in this respect.
Based on the nose detection results, three instance segmentation algorithms,
Mask2Former, Mask R-CNN, and SOLOv2, are used for training, and the detection results
of the obtained model on the test set are shown in Table 2. It can be seen that the instance
segmentation algorithm Mask2Former used in this paper has obvious advantages over
Mask R-CNN and SOLOv2.

--- Page 8 ---
Agriculture 2023, 13, 1939 8 of 15
Table 2. Comparison of nostril segmentation evaluation parameters.
Algorithm AP 50
Mask2Former 75.71
Mask R-CNN 67.32
SOLOv2 68.27
Based on the nose detection results, the Mask2Former instance segmentation method
is used to extract the cow nostril area from the cow IRT images numbered 2855, and the
effect is shown in Figure 4. The nostril segmentation result of the cow in the ﬁgure is
indicated by a mask. The size of the nostril area is approximately 20 × 16 pixels, and
objects with pixel areas less than 32× 32 pixels are deﬁned as small objects in the COCO
dataset. One of the difﬁculties of small object detection is that the RGB information of the
nostrils is too small, so it contains too few discriminative features. Second, the dataset
is unbalanced, and there is a serious image-level imbalance in COCO [ 29]. Third, small
objects have different degrees of occlusion, ambiguity, and incompleteness. Therefore, there
are different degrees of false detection and missed detection in the segmentation results of
the nostril area, and the results are shown in Figure 5. Table 3 is obtained after the traversal
analysis of the results after nostril detection.
Agriculture 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 16 
 
 
real-time than two-stage [28]. However, it is di ﬃcult to detect small objects in a single-
stage framework, and a two-stage framework is better in this respect. 
Based on the nose detection results, three instance segmentation algorithms, 
Mask2Former, Mask R-CNN, and SOLOv2, are used for training, and the detection results 
of the obtained model on the test set are shown in Table 2. It can be seen that the instance 
segmentation algorithm Mask2Former used in this paper has obvious advantages over 
Mask R-CNN and SOLOv2. 
Table 2. Comparison of nostril segmentation evaluation parameters. 
Algorithm AP 50 
Mask2Former 75.71 
Mask R-CNN 67.32 
SOLOv2 68.27 
Based on the nose detection results, the Mask2Former instance segmentation method 
is used to extract the cow nostril area fr om the cow IRT images numbered 2855, and the 
eﬀect is shown in Figure 4. The nostril segmentation result of the cow in the ﬁgure is in-
dicated by a mask. The size of the nostril area is approximately 20 × 16 pixels, and objects 
with pixel areas less than 32 × 32 pixels are deﬁned as small objects in the COCO dataset. 
One of the diﬃculties of small object detection is that the RGB information of the nostrils 
is too small, so it contains too few discriminative features. Second, the dataset is unbal-
anced, and there is a serious image-level imbalance in COCO [29]. Third, small objects 
have diﬀerent degrees of occlusion, ambiguity, and incompleteness. Therefore, there are 
diﬀerent degrees of false detection and missed detection in the segmentation results of the 
nostril area, and the results are shown in Figure 5. Table 3 is obtained after the traversal 
analysis of the results after nostril detection. 
 
Figure 4. Example of a cow’s nostril detection results. 
 
Figure 4. Example of a cow’s nostril detection results.
Agriculture 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 16 
 
 
real-time than two-stage [28]. However, it is di ﬃcult to detect small objects in a single-
stage framework, and a two-stage framework is better in this respect. 
Based on the nose detection results, three instance segmentation algorithms, 
Mask2Former, Mask R-CNN, and SOLOv2, are used for training, and the detection results 
of the obtained model on the test set are shown in Table 2. It can be seen that the instance 
segmentation algorithm Mask2Former used in this paper has obvious advantages over 
Mask R-CNN and SOLOv2. 
Table 2. Comparison of nostril segmentation evaluation parameters. 
Algorithm AP 50 
Mask2Former 75.71 
Mask R-CNN 67.32 
SOLOv2 68.27 
Based on the nose detection results, the Mask2Former instance segmentation method 
is used to extract the cow nostril area fr om the cow IRT images numbered 2855, and the 
eﬀect is shown in Figure 4. The nostril segmentation result of the cow in the ﬁgure is in-
dicated by a mask. The size of the nostril area is approximately 20 × 16 pixels, and objects 
with pixel areas less than 32 × 32 pixels are deﬁned as small objects in the COCO dataset. 
One of the diﬃculties of small object detection is that the RGB information of the nostrils 
is too small, so it contains too few discriminative features. Second, the dataset is unbal-
anced, and there is a serious image-level imbalance in COCO [29]. Third, small objects 
have diﬀerent degrees of occlusion, ambiguity, and incompleteness. Therefore, there are 
diﬀerent degrees of false detection and missed detection in the segmentation results of the 
nostril area, and the results are shown in Figure 5. Table 3 is obtained after the traversal 
analysis of the results after nostril detection. 
 
Figure 4. Example of a cow’s nostril detection results. 
 
Figure 5. Examples of false segmentation and missed segmentation of nostril.
The analysis shows that one of the reasons for the error is that the nostril is a small
object. Moreover, the method in this paper must be based on the correct detection of the
cow nose, and the ﬁnal segmentation of the nostril area is highly dependent on the accuracy
of nose detection. If the missing rate of the nose is high or there are a large number of
false alarm objects, then the accuracy of nostril segmentation will be reduced. According

--- Page 9 ---
Agriculture 2023, 13, 1939 9 of 15
to Table 3, the average proportion of false detection and missed detection is only 5.02%,
which shows that the algorithm has high accuracy for cow nostril detection.
Table 3. Proportion of false detection and missed detection of nostril.
Cow Number
Total
Detection
(/Frame)
False Detection
(/Frame)
Missed
Detection
(/Frame)
Proportion
1386 4871 297 3 6.16%
1563 3500 171 12 5.23%
1568 4500 215 17 5.16%
1809 3449 156 10 4.81%
2855 3750 134 6 3.73%
3.1.3. Results of RR Detecting
Figure 6 depicts the result of visualizing the extracted temperature of the nostril area
of each frame after extracting the temperature of cow No. 1386.
Agriculture 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 16 
 
 
Figure 5. Examples of false segmentation and missed segmentation of nostril.. 
Table 3. Proportion of false detection and missed detection of nostril. 
Cow Number 
Total** 
Detection 
(/Frame) 
False Detection 
(/Frame) 
Missed ** 
Detection 
(/Frame) 
Proportion 
1386 4871 297 3 6.16% 
1563 3500 171 12 5.23% 
1568 4500 215 17 5.16% 
1809 3449 156 10 4.81% 
2855 3750 134 6 3.73% 
The analysis shows that one of the reasons for the error is that the nostril is a small 
object. Moreover, the method in this paper must be based on the correct detection of the 
cow nose, and the ﬁnal segmentation of the nostril area is highly dependent on the accu-
racy of nose detection. If the missing rate of the nose is high or there are a large number 
of false alarm objects, then the accuracy of nostril segmentation will be reduced. Accord-
ing to Table 3, the average proportion of false detection and missed detection is only 
5.02%, which shows that the algorithm has high accuracy for cow nostril detection. 
3.1.3. Results of RR Detecting 
Figure 6 depicts the result of visualizing the extracted temperature of the nostril area 
of each frame after extracting the temperature of cow No. 1386. 
 
Figure 6. Example of the temperature change curve. 
In this study, the temperature obtained in the previous step was further analysed 
according to the method described in Section 2.4, and the results are shown in Figure 7. 
Figure 7a is a spectrum analysis diagram before ﬁltering; Figure 7b is a spectrum analysis 
diagram after Bu tterworth ﬁltering; and Figure 7c is the result of ﬁltering the Fourier 
transformed data with the Butterworth ﬁlter and traversing the signal marker peaks with 
the sliding window method in this study. 
Figure 6. Example of the temperature change curve.
In this study, the temperature obtained in the previous step was further analysed
according to the method described in Section 2.4, and the results are shown in Figure 7.
Figure 7a is a spectrum analysis diagram before ﬁltering; Figure 7b is a spectrum analysis
diagram after Butterworth ﬁltering; and Figure 7c is the result of ﬁltering the Fourier
transformed data with the Butterworth ﬁlter and traversing the signal marker peaks with
the sliding window method in this study.
The results of detecting the number of breaths on the test data by using this model
are shown in Figure 8. The number of breaths of cows in 81 IRT videos were counted and
compared using the model and manually. Through the error analysis of manual counting
and model counting, 50 of the 81 counting points have an error of 0, accounting for 61.73%,
and 31 have an error of 1, accounting for 38.27%, indicating a high accuracy rate. Table 4
shows the accuracy ω for the detection of RR.
Figure 8 and Table 4 show that the average accuracy ω of breath count detection of
the test data is 94.58%, which demonstrates strong resistance to interference factors, such
as temporary foreign object intrusion, video capture quality, light, and shade changes, and
good robustness for RR detecting. Additionally, the average detection rate is high, which
meets the practical requirements.

--- Page 10 ---
Agriculture 2023, 13, 1939 10 of 15
Agriculture 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 16 
 
 
 
(a) ( b) 
 
(c) 
Figure 7. Temperature analysis results. (a) Spectrum analysis before ﬁltering; (b) Spectrum analysis 
after Bu tterworth ﬁltering; (c) Bu tterworth-ﬁltered and tagged peak resu lts. Where, the blue line 
represents the respiration temperature change curve after ﬁltering. The red lines indicate crests 
prominence. 
The results of detecting the number of brea ths on the test data by using this model 
are shown in Figure 8. The number of breaths of cows in 81 IRT videos were counted and 
compared using the model and manually. Through the error analysis of manual counting 
and model counting, 50 of the 81 counting points have an error of 0, accounting for 61.73%, 
and 31 have an error of 1, accounting for 38.27%, indicating a high accuracy rate. Table 4 
shows the accuracy ω for the detection of RR. 
Figure 7. Temperature analysis results. ( a) Spectrum analysis before ﬁltering; ( b) Spectrum anal-
ysis after Butterworth ﬁltering; ( c) Butterworth-ﬁltered and tagged peak results. Where, the blue
line represents the respiration temperature change curve after ﬁltering. The red lines indicate
crests prominence.
Agriculture 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 16 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Automatic counting results of respiration times. 
Table 4. Detection accuracy of respiration rate for diﬀerent cows. 
Cow Number 1386 1809 2855 1563 1568 
Accuracy ω 92.57% 95.24% 97.22% 93.89% 93.96% 
Figure 8 and Table 4 show that the average accuracy ω of breath count detection of 
the test data is 94.58%, which demonstrates strong resistance to interference factors, such 
as temporary foreign object intrusion, video capture quality, light, and shade changes, and 
good robustness for RR detecting. Additionally, the average detection rate is high, which 
meets the practical requirements. 
3.2. Discussion 
3.2.1. Analysis of Nose–Nostril Detection 
This paper also tests the direct instan ce segmentation model, which cannot fully 
adapt to the experimental data. Mask2Former is used to train the whole group of videos 
directly. Because the cow’s nostril area is small and contains fewer features, there are more 
interference features, leading to the training results AP
50 being only 55.0, so the infor-
mation of nostril temperature change could not be accurately obtained. After changing to 
the cascade segmentation method, the cow nose was detected ﬁrst, and the detection area 
was reduced to the cow nose area with less interference. Then, segmentation of the nostrils 
is carried out. The segmented AP 50 of the nostril can reach 75.71, which is 37.7% higher 
than that of the direct segmentation model. 
The results show that the cascaded model can eﬀectively reduce the interference fea-
tures outside the nose and reduce the error. The direct segmentation model will falsely 
detect small objects such as moles or ear hole s as nostrils, as shown in Figure 9a. After 
changing to the cascaded segmentation model, the false detection phenomenon com-
pletely disappears, as show n in Figure 9b. This e ﬀectively improves the accuracy of the 
next step of cow breath detection, shows a strong anti-interference capability, and can be 
used in combination with cow identiﬁcation technology to achieve multiobject cow breath 
detection. 
Figure 8. Automatic counting results of respiration times.

--- Page 11 ---
Agriculture 2023, 13, 1939 11 of 15
Table 4. Detection accuracy of respiration rate for different cows.
Cow
Number 1386 1809 2855 1563 1568
Accuracy ω 92.57% 95.24% 97.22% 93.89% 93.96%
3.2. Discussion
3.2.1. Analysis of Nose–Nostril Detection
This paper also tests the direct instance segmentation model, which cannot fully
adapt to the experimental data. Mask2Former is used to train the whole group of videos
directly. Because the cow’s nostril area is small and contains fewer features, there are more
interference features, leading to the training results AP50 being only 55.0, so the information
of nostril temperature change could not be accurately obtained. After changing to the
cascade segmentation method, the cow nose was detected ﬁrst, and the detection area was
reduced to the cow nose area with less interference. Then, segmentation of the nostrils is
carried out. The segmented AP50 of the nostril can reach 75.71, which is 37.7% higher than
that of the direct segmentation model.
The results show that the cascaded model can effectively reduce the interference fea-
tures outside the nose and reduce the error. The direct segmentation model will falsely
detect small objects such as moles or ear holes as nostrils, as shown in Figure 9a. After
changing to the cascaded segmentation model, the false detection phenomenon com-
pletely disappears, as shown in Figure 9b. This effectively improves the accuracy of the
next step of cow breath detection, shows a strong anti-interference capability, and can
be used in combination with cow identiﬁcation technology to achieve multiobject cow
breath detection.
Agriculture 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 16 
 
 
 
(a) ( b) 
Figure 9. Comparison of direct nostril detection and nose–nostril detection. ( a) A non-nostril is de-
tected as a nostril by the direct detection; (b) Right detection by the cascaded algorithm. 
3.2.2. Analysis of the Inﬂuence of Head Swing on the Results of RR Detecting 
Cows, as living bodies, often produce head swings and other interference factors dur-
ing the data collection process. To verify the robustness of this algorithm more accurately, 
in this study, the head swing movement of cows is analysed to clarify the eﬀectiveness of 
this method. 
There are three fundamental reasons for the inﬂuence of the cow’s head swing on the 
detection results. First, because the cow’s respiratory behaviour is weak, for the video-
based respiratory behaviour monitoring method , the camera needs to be placed close to 
the cow, and the cow’s action (interference) will a ﬀect the accuracy of the monitoring re-
sults. Second, the temperature of the nostril area is unstable along with the swing move-
ment of the cow head. Third, the head of the cow shakes violently, which leads to a reduc-
tion in the conﬁdence in object extraction. 
The average accuracy of breath detection of the 20-segment thermal imaging video 
of the No. 1386 cow was 92.57%, and the main reason for the low accuracy was that the 
head of the cow shook violently. This reduced the conﬁdence of object extraction and the 
temperature data used to detect the RR, resulting in a signi ﬁcant decline in the accuracy 
of RR detection. 
In the test data of ﬁve cows with 81 segments, except for No. 1386, the other four 
cows had motion interference, and the average accuracy of respiration detection was 
95.08%, which was higher than the 92.57% accuracy of No. 1386. This was because the 
interference caused by head swing movement was not intense, global, or continuous, and 
the movement time was short. This did not a ﬀect the detection of breathing behaviour 
using nostril temperature changes. 
In summary, in the case of cow head swing interference, the ﬁnal detection accuracy 
is less aﬀected, which proves that the algorithm in this study has good robustness and can 
accurately complete the detection of breathing behaviour. In a follow-up study, we can 
increase the proportion of head swing images in the training set so that the algorithm has 
better robustness when the cow’s head swings. 
3.2.3. Analysis of the Impact of Waveform Noise on the Results of RR Detecting 
The temperature extraction result of this algorithm is shown in Figure 6. By analysing 
the noise phenomenon, it is found that there are two main reasons for the noise: one is 
generated in the process of data acquisition; and the second, is due to nose detection 
missed, false alarms, nostril segmentation missed, and false detection. 
To eliminate noise interference in this paper, a Fourier transform is used to analyse 
the signal spectrum, and then a Butterworth ﬁlter is used to smooth the ﬁlter. 
Figure 9. Comparison of direct nostril detection and nose–nostril detection. ( a) A non-nostril is
detected as a nostril by the direct detection; (b) Right detection by the cascaded algorithm.
3.2.2. Analysis of the Inﬂuence of Head Swing on the Results of RR Detecting
Cows, as living bodies, often produce head swings and other interference factors dur-
ing the data collection process. To verify the robustness of this algorithm more accurately,
in this study, the head swing movement of cows is analysed to clarify the effectiveness of
this method.
There are three fundamental reasons for the inﬂuence of the cow’s head swing on the
detection results. First, because the cow’s respiratory behaviour is weak, for the video-
based respiratory behaviour monitoring method, the camera needs to be placed close to the
cow, and the cow’s action (interference) will affect the accuracy of the monitoring results.
Second, the temperature of the nostril area is unstable along with the swing movement of
the cow head. Third, the head of the cow shakes violently, which leads to a reduction in the
conﬁdence in object extraction.

--- Page 12 ---
Agriculture 2023, 13, 1939 12 of 15
The average accuracy of breath detection of the 20-segment thermal imaging video
of the No. 1386 cow was 92.57%, and the main reason for the low accuracy was that the
head of the cow shook violently. This reduced the conﬁdence of object extraction and the
temperature data used to detect the RR, resulting in a signiﬁcant decline in the accuracy of
RR detection.
In the test data of ﬁve cows with 81 segments, except for No. 1386, the other four
cows had motion interference, and the average accuracy of respiration detection was
95.08%, which was higher than the 92.57% accuracy of No. 1386. This was because the
interference caused by head swing movement was not intense, global, or continuous, and
the movement time was short. This did not affect the detection of breathing behaviour
using nostril temperature changes.
In summary, in the case of cow head swing interference, the ﬁnal detection accuracy is
less affected, which proves that the algorithm in this study has good robustness and can
accurately complete the detection of breathing behaviour. In a follow-up study, we can
increase the proportion of head swing images in the training set so that the algorithm has
better robustness when the cow’s head swings.
3.2.3. Analysis of the Impact of Waveform Noise on the Results of RR Detecting
The temperature extraction result of this algorithm is shown in Figure 6. By analysing
the noise phenomenon, it is found that there are two main reasons for the noise: one is
generated in the process of data acquisition; and the second, is due to nose detection missed,
false alarms, nostril segmentation missed, and false detection.
To eliminate noise interference in this paper, a Fourier transform is used to analyse the
signal spectrum, and then a Butterworth ﬁlter is used to smooth the ﬁlter.
The experimental results show that the noise analysis in this paper is correct and the
noise suppression effect of object extraction is obvious. In contrast, the noise generated
by data acquisition is a systematic error, which is inevitable and has little impact on the
experimental results. In summary, the ﬁnal detection accuracy is less affected by noise,
which proves that the algorithm has good robustness.
3.3. Comparison with Other Detection Methods
Jorquera-Chavez et al. (2019) collected nonradiative infrared videos of cows’ faces
via an infrared thermal camera and calculated their RR according to the changes in pixel
intensity values in the nose region caused by respiratory airﬂow during breathing [30]. The
correlation coefﬁcient R between the respiratory frequency measured by this method and
the results obtained by manual observation was 0.87. Lowe et al. (2019) completed the de-
tection of respiratory behaviour by recording thermal ﬂuctuations around the nostrils with
an infrared thermal camera, and the test results showed that the correlation between this
method and manual counting reached 0.93 [31]. Wu et al. (2020) proposed a combination of
Deeplab V3+ and the PBVM action ampliﬁcation algorithm to detect respiratory behaviour
in standing cows with an accuracy of 93.04% [32].
In this study, IRT videos of dairy cows were recorded by an infrared thermal cam-
era, and a cascade method of dairy cow respiratory status monitoring was proposed by
combining YOLO v8 and Mask2Former to detect the nose ﬁrst and then the nostrils. The
accuracy of respiratory number detection in 81 thermal imaging videos of ﬁve dairy cows
was 94.58%, and the correlation coefﬁcient R was 0.95. The results show that the algorithm
can detect the cow’s breathing behaviour well, providing a basis for the follow-up study of
the multiobject cow’s breathing behaviour detection method.
3.4. Outlook
Although the method in this paper has achieved a reliable effect on the change in
temperature ﬂow in the nostril area of dairy cows, there are still some shortcomings.
The research basis of this model is nose detection based on YOLO v8 and nostril area
segmentation based on deep learning. The cow nostril object occupies fewer effective pixels

--- Page 13 ---
Agriculture 2023, 13, 1939 13 of 15
in the video picture, and the breathing amplitude is smaller and more difﬁcult to observe.
In addition, the environment is changeable, and there is considerable interference, which
aggravate the difﬁculty of cow breathing detection. In future studies, cameras with higher
resolution can be utilized, and nostril features can be added to improve the accuracy of
RR detection.
In the data acquisition process in this study, the camera is ﬁxed, and there is a situation
in which the cow’s nostril area is not in the acquisition area due to the swing of the cow’s
head, which results in the loss of breathing fragments. In future research, a tracking camera
can be used to develop a real-time image display and processing platform to achieve remote
real-time acquisition and processing of cow video.
As experiments progressed, the respiratory behaviour of multiobject dairy cows
can be explored based on the study of single-object dairy cows’ respiratory behaviour.
However, dairy cows are easy to gather in natural scenes, and there are some problems
in the detection of multiobject dairy cows’ respiratory behaviour, such as complex and
changeable movements, many irrelevant interferences, as well as difﬁculty in detecting
the RR of different dairy cows. The identity of a cow can be determined by a cow face
recognition algorithm, and the position area of the cow object can be detected by an
object detection algorithm. Different cow objects can be marked according to the position
information, and the RR detecting of each cow object can be completed by developing
a respiratory status monitoring algorithm. Multiobjective monitoring of the respiratory
status of dairy cows can be achieved, and the application value of new technology and
new algorithms for the welfare of dairy cows and the economic beneﬁts of dairy farms can
be improved.
This method has more advantages in the application prospect of large dairy farms, and
the infrared thermal camera can be installed in the intelligent inspection robot, which has a
higher utilization rate than the ﬁxed camera position acquisition method. High utilization
of instruments means lower costs. At the same time, it is more convenient to collect the
facial data of cows than the abdominal data, and the requirements for the cooperation
of cows are lower. This method will provide a reference for large-scale intelligent dairy
farming. In the future, it may provide reference for automatic monitoring of heat stress in
dairy cows and remote diagnosis of other diseases related to respiratory behavior.
4. Conclusions
According to the characteristics of temperature change in the nostril area when cows
breathe, a cow respiratory status monitoring system based on IRT is proposed. YOLO v8 is
proposed to detect the cow’s nose from IRT images without contact; the results showed
that the AP 50 of nose detection reached 98.6%. Three kinds of instance segmentation
models were used to realize nostril area, and the ﬁnal experimental results show that
Mask2Former has obvious advantages over Mask R-CNN and SOLOv2, AP 50 achieved
75.71%. The maximum accuracy of RR detection is 97.22%, the minimum accuracy of RR
detection is 92.57%, the average accuracy of RR detection is 94.58%, and the correlation
coefﬁcient R was 0.95, higher than in previous studies on RR. The recognition effect was
better than that of the combination of Deeplab V3+ and the PBVM action ampliﬁcation
algorithm to detect respiratory behaviour in standing cows, which remarkably improved
the accuracy and efﬁciency of the detection of RR. Therefore, the method presented in
this paper could promote the popularization and application of automatic detection of RR
systems in large-scale dairy farming.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Y.D., Q.L. and K.Z.; Methodology, Y.D., K.Z. and X.H.;
Software, Y.D., J.C. and X.H.; Validation, Y.D.; Formal analysis, Y.D. and Q.L.; Investigation, K.Z.;
Resources, Y.D., Q.L. and K.Z.; Data curation, K.Z. and X.H.; Writing—original draft, Y.D.;
Writing—review and editing, R.Z. and Y.D.; Visualization, X.H. and M.W.; Supervision, Q.L.; Project
administration, K.Z.; Funding acquisition, Q.L. and X.H. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.

--- Page 14 ---
Agriculture 2023, 13, 1939 14 of 15
Funding: This work was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant
No. 32002227), International Science and Technology Cooperation Project of Henan Province Key
Research and Development Projects (Grant No. 232102521006), University Science and Technology
Innovation Talent Project of Henan Province (Grant No. 24HASTIT052), and Natural Science Basic
Research Plan in Shaanxi Province of China (Program No. 2022JQ-175).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Grant No. 32002227), International Science and Technology Cooperation Project of Henan Province
Key Research and Development Projects (Grant No. 232102521006), University Science and Technol-
ogy Innovation Talent Project of Henan Province (Grant No. 24HASTIT052), and Natural Science
Basic Research Plan in Shaanxi Province of China (Program No. 2022JQ-175). The authors appre-
ciate the funding organisation for their ﬁnancial support. The authors would also like to thank
the helpful comments and suggestions provided by all the authors cited in this article and the
anonymous reviewers.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Cui, Y. Normal physiological indicators and examination methods of dairy cows. T ech. Advis. Anim. Husb. 2013, 18, e0206520.
2. Polsky, L.; von Keyserlingk, M.A. Invited review: Effects of heat stress on dairy cattle welfare. J. Dairy Sci. 2017, 100, 8645–8657.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Das, R.; Sailo, L.; Verma, N.; Bharti, P .; Saikia, J.; Kumar, R. Impact of heat stress on health and performance of dairy animals: A
review. Vet. World 2016, 9, 260–268. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. De Rensis, F.; Garcia-Ispierto, I.; López-Gatius, F. Seasonal heat stress: Clinical implications and hormone treatments for the
fertility of dairy cows. Theriogenology 2015, 84, 659–666. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Guo, L.; WANG, J.; Li, F. Thoughts and Suggestions on the Determination of the Dairy Herd Improvement in China under the
Background of Construction of a Modern Dairy Industry. Chin. J. Anim. Sci. 2015, 51, 7–11.
6. Milan, H.F.M.; Maia, A.S.C.; Gebremedhin, K.G. Technical note: Device for measuring respiration rate of cattle under ﬁeld
conditions. J. Anim. Sci. 2016, 94, 5434–5438. [CrossRef]
7. He, D.; Liu, D.; Zhao, K. Review of Perceiving Animal Information and Behavior in Precision Livestock Farming. T rans. Chin. Soc.
Agric. Mach. 2016, 47, 231–244. [CrossRef]
8. Yan, X.; Liu, H.; Jia, Z.; Tian, S.; Pi, X. Advances in the detection of respiratory rate. Beijing Biomed. Eng. 2017, 36, 545–549.
[CrossRef]
9. Chen, Y.; Hou, Z.; Chen, C.; Liang, J.; Su, H. Research on non-contact respiratory detection algorithm based on depth images.
Comput. Meas. Control. 2017, 25, 213–217. [CrossRef]
10. Eigenberg, R.A.; Hahn, G.L.; Nienaber, J.A.; Brown-Brandl, T.M.; Spiers, D.E. Development of a new respiration rate monitor for
cattle. T rans. ASAE2000, 43, 723–728. [CrossRef]
11. Strutzke, S.; Fiske, D.; Hoffmann, G.; Ammon, C.; Heuwieser, W.; Amon, T. Technical note: Development of a noninvasive
respiration rate sensor for cattle. J. Dairy Sci. 2019, 102, 690–695. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Li, D. Research on the Model and Efﬁciency of Dairy Cow Breeding in China. Ph.D. Thesis, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Beijing, China, 2013.
13. Liang, T.; Weixing, Z.; Xincheng, L.; Lei, Y. Identiﬁcation and detection of swine respiratory frequency based on area feature
operator. Inf. T echnol.2015, 2, 73–77. [CrossRef]
14. Benetazzo, F.; Freddi, A.; Monteriù, A.; Longhi, S. Respiratory rate detection algorithm based on RGB-D camera: Theoretical
background and experimental results. Healthc. T echnol. Lett. 2014, 1, 81–86. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Zhao, K.; He, D.; Wang, E. Detection of Breathing Rate and Abnormity of Dairy Cattle Based on Video Analysis. T rans. Chin. Soc.
Agric. Mach. 2014, 45, 258–263. [CrossRef]
16. Zeng, Y.; Wu, D.; Xiong, J.; Liu, J.; Liu, Z.; Zhang, D. MultiSense: Enabling multi-person respiration sensing with commodity wiﬁ.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous T echnol. 2020, 4, 1–29. [CrossRef]
17. Ma, T. Principle and Application Analysis of Infrared Thermal Camera. In Proceedings of the the 14th Ningxia Youth Scientists
Forum Petrochemical Special Forum, Yinchuan, China, 24 July 2018; pp. 323 325+329.
18. Stewart, M.; Wilson, M.T.; Schaefer, A.L.; Huddart, F.; Sutherland, M.A. The use of infrared thermography and accelerometers for
remote monitoring of dairy cow health and welfare. J. Dairy Sci. 2017, 100, 3893–3901. [CrossRef]
19. Wang, Z.; Song, H.; Wang, Y.; Hua, Z.; Li, R.; Xu, X. Research Progress and Technology Trend of Intelligent Morning of Dairy Cow
Motion Behavior. Smart Agric. 2022, 4, 36. [CrossRef]
20. Redmon, J.; Divvala, S.; Girshick, R.; Farhadi, A. You only look once: Uniﬁed, real-time object detection. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Las Vegas, NV , USA, 27–30 June 2016; pp. 779–788.

--- Page 15 ---
Agriculture 2023, 13, 1939 15 of 15
21. Jocher, G.; Chaurasia, A.; Qiu, J. YOLO by Ultralytics (Version 8.0.0) [Computer Software]. Available online: https://github.com/
ultralytics/ultralytics (accessed on 30 May 2023).
22. Wang, M.; Song, W. An RGB-D SLAM Algorithm Based on Adaptive Semantic Segmentation in Dynamic Environment.Robot
2023, 45, 16–27. [CrossRef]
23. He, K.; Gkioxari, G.; Dollár, P .; Girshick, R. Mask r-cnn. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision,
Venice, Italy, 22–29 October 2017; pp. 2961–2969.
24. Cheng, B.; Misra, I.; Schwing, A.G.; Kirillov, A.; Girdhar, R. Masked-attention mask transformer for universal image segmentation.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, New Orleans, LA, USA, 18–24 June
2022; pp. 1290–1299.
25. Agrawal, N.; Kumar, A.; Bajaj, V .; Lee, H.-N. Controlled ripple based design of digital IIR ﬁlter. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE
International Conference on Digital Signal Processing (DSP), Beijing, China, 16–18 October 2016; pp. 627–631.
26. Wang, X.; Zhang, R.; Kong, T.; Li, L.; Shen, C. Solov2: Dynamic and fast instance segmentation. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.
2020, 33, 17721–17732.
27. Huang, T.; Hua, L.; Gui, Z.; Shaobo, L.; Yang, W. Survey of Research on Instance Segmentation Methods.J. Front. Comput. Sci.
T echnol.2023, 17, 810–825. [CrossRef]
28. Qi, L.; Wang, Y.; Chen, Y.; Chen, Y.-C.; Zhang, X.; Sun, J.; Jia, J. Pointins: Point-based instance segmentation.IEEE T rans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell. 2021, 44, 6377–6392. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Kisantal, M.; Wojna, Z.; Murawski, J.; Naruniec, J.; Cho, K. Augmentation for small object detection. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1902.07296.
[CrossRef]
30. Jorquera-Chavez, M.; Fuentes, S.; Dunshea, F.R.; Warner, R.D.; Poblete, T.; Jongman, E.C. Modelling and Validation of Computer
Vision Techniques to Assess Heart Rate, Eye Temperature, Ear-Base Temperature and Respiration Rate in Cattle.Animals 2019, 9,
1089. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31. Lowe, G.; Sutherland, M.; Waas, J.; Schaefer, A.; Cox, N.; Stewart, M. Infrared thermography—A non-invasive method of
measuring respiration rate in calves. Animals 2019, 9, 535. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Wu, D.; Yin, X.; Jiang, B.; Jiang, M.; Li, Z.; Song, H. Detection of the respiratory rate of standing cows by combining the Deeplab
V3+ semantic segmentation model with the phase-based video magniﬁcation algorithm. Biosyst. Eng. 2020, 192, 72–89. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.