--- Page 1 ---
R
espiratory heat transfer is a significant pathway
of heat loss for most mammals (homeotherms)
under a wide range of environmental conditions
(Ingram and Mount, 1975). Respiration rate (RR)
provides an easily observed measure of an animal’s thermal
state and can be a valuable physiological parameter in
conjunction with additional information, such as ambient
temperature (T
a), humidity, radiation heat loads (Garrett et
al., 1967; Hahn, 1976), and air velocity (Monteith, 1973).
Physiological responses of cattle have been studied
intensively and RR has been shown to behave predictably,
increasing with rising ambient temperature (Hahn et al.,
1997; Morrison and Lofgreen, 1979; Webster, 1973; Kibler
and Brody, 1949). However, RR response is non-linear. As
T
a increases beyond a threshold, RR increases more
rapidly; this threshold occurs near heat stress conditions for
cattle (Hahn et al., 1997). An understanding of the RR
response for cattle should allow producers to better
recognize animal distress and to initiate planned
intervention to minimize performance losses and reduce
death losses under stressing conditions (Hahn et al., 1997).
While RR is easily observable by traditional means
(e.g., using a stopwatch while counting flank movement),
long term studies that require frequent measures become
tedious and labor intensive. There is also a possibility of
observer influence on the animal. Automated RR
monitoring is desirable to increase the frequency of
measures as an evaluation of response dynamics and to
provide a more robust application of time-series
techniques; to provide consistent data; and to reduce the
labor requirements for data collection. Existing automated
RR equipment is quite limited, and unsuitable for large
animal applications. A respiratory effort transducer for
humans (BIOPAC Systems Inc., 1997) incorporates a thin-
film transducer into a silicone rubber strain assembly that
changes resistance with changing thoracic or abdominal
circumference. Most human applications involve subjects
that are cooperative and conscious of the limitations of
such monitoring devices. Few devices for free-ranging
animals are described in the literature. Data Sciences Intl.
(Data Science Int., 1996) has developed a method that
provides accurate determination of respiratory rate for free
moving rats monitored via implanted telemetry sensors.
The technique is patent-pending and is based on changes in
cardiovascular data resulting from respiratory effort. The
application to larger animals is still not fully developed.
Monitoring of cattle respiration has been accomplished
using temperature sensors positioned near the nostrils of
the animals (Hahn, 1998) but this method has not come
into widespread use. Rugged sensors and data logging
equipment are needed to provide this response variable.
The purpose of this work was to develop respiration
monitors suitable for use on cattle. These units are to
measure and store respiration data under various laboratory
and field conditions. Testing of these units was done in
DEVELOPMENT OF A NEW RESPIRATION RATE MONITOR FOR CATTLE
R. A. Eigenberg, G. L. Hahn, J. A. Nienaber, T. M. Brown-Brandl, D. E. Spiers
ABSTRACT. Studies were conducted investigating bioenergetic responses of growing cattle to heat challenges using
respiration rate as one of the primary measures. Respiration rate (RR) was measured using monitors designed from
commercially available thin-film pressure sensors and a small battery powered micro-computer. The monitors were
designed, fabricated, and tested to provide continuous records as a basis for evaluating stress responses associated with
environmental conditions. This article provides details about the monitors and the suitability of obtained records as an
indicator of stress, based on measures obtained in environmental chambers during constant and simulated heat wave
conditions as well as a field study. Representative data from two laboratory studies indicated an association of RR and
ambient temperature (P < 0.01) with diurnal changes being evident in the cyclic test and step changes being evident in
the constant ambient temperature tests. A two to three breaths per minute (BPM) rate of change of RR with respect to
ambient temperature (°C) was observed for steers in the laboratory studies. The field study revealed a striking response of
RR to the ambient temperature (6.6 BPM/°C rate of change) for a steer that had direct solar load (no-shade) compared to
a 1.6 BPM/°C rate of change in the shade.
Keywords. Bioenergetics, Respiration rate monitor, Transducer, Microcomputer, Environmental stress.
Article was submitted for publication in November 1999; reviewed
and approved for publication by the Structures & Environment Division
of ASAE in February 2000. Presented as ASAE Paper No. 99-4211.
Names are necessary to report factually on available data; however,
the USDA neither guarantees nor warrants the standard of the product,
and the use of the name by USDA implies no approval of the product to
the exclusion of others that may also be suitable.
The authors are Roger A. Eigenberg , Agricultural Engineer, G.
Leroy Hahn , ASAE Fellow , Collaborator, John A. Nienaber , ASAE
Member , Agricultural Engineer, Tami M. Brown-Brandl , ASAE
Member, Agricultural Engineer, Biological Engineering Research Unit,
USDA/ARS U.S. Meat Animal Research Center, Clay Center, Nebraska;
Donald E. Spiers , ASAE Member , Associate Professor, University of
Missouri, Columbia, Missouri. Corresponding author: Dr. Roger
Eigenberg, USDA/ARS U.S. Meat Animal Research Center, PO Box 166,
Clay Center, NE 68933, phone: 402.762.4272, fax: 402.762.4273, e-mail
<eigenberg@email.marc.usda.gov>. 
Transactions of the ASAE
© 2000 American Society of Agricultural Engineers 0001-2351 / 00 / 4303-723 723VOL. 43(3): 723-728
 se 1808 ms 7/9/01 9:39 AM Page 723

--- Page 2 ---
laboratory conditions to determine functionality and
reliability.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
A respiration monitoring system was designed with
three major components: (1) respiration rate sensor and the
respiration belt that maintains tension and holds the
transducer in place; (2) a data logging device capable of
recording the respiration data and transferring it as data
files for analysis; and (3) the analysis program that allows
the data to be interpreted. Each of the components are
described in the sections that follow.
R
ESPIRATION RATE SENSOR ASSEMBLY
A critical component of a RR monitor is the force
transducer. Ruggedness and reliability are key
requirements of any transducer used in this application
while linearity and low hysteresis are less critical. A
UniForce™ surface mount transducer (Force Imaging
Technologies, Chicago, Ill.) (fig. 1) was chosen to provide
an electrical signal in response to pulmonary effort (rib
cage expansion/ contraction). The thin film transducer was
constructed with a bottom layer of conducting substrate
(typically silver) under a layer of a special pressure
sensitive material applied in the sensing area. The
transducer acts as a variable resistive element requiring a
conditioning circuit (this can be a simple voltage divider)
to provide meaningful input to a data logger. Attachment to
the sensor assembly is made using the adhesive backing of
the transducer. Electrical connection was made via the
adhesive electrical contact material of the force transducer
which was bonded to two small brass pins providing solder
points for wires (fig. 1).
Respiration sensor requirements for cattle include
rugged construction, reliable operation and ability to
withstand environmental extremes. The RR sensor used in
this application was constructed with the force transducer
mounted to one of two small acrylic cylinders housed in a
pull/pull dual cylinder arrangement (fig. 2). The two
plastic cylinders were machined to fit into an outer
aluminum tube which provided protection and housing for
the mechanical sliding action. The two inner cylinders were
free to move within the aluminum tube (fig. 3); any pull on
either of the attach points resulted in compression against
the transducer element.
The belt held the sensor in place and provided a
constant low force tension (approximately one-third of
full scale sensor output). The belt must conform to the
shape of the animal and be unaffected by precipitation,
manure and urine. After several material considerations, a
lightweight shock-cord (bungee cord) was chosen for
availability, structural integrity, elasticity, durability, ease
of use, low cost, and low resistive drag on the animal hide.
The mounting method involved using two cords to span the
abdominal circumference (fig. 4), with each end of the cord
attached to a ring on either side of the sensor.
The RR sensor provides relative changes and does not
give sufficient signal repeatability to provide total volume
measures or amplitude of breath. An altered force
transducer and attachment method would be required to
accurately assess these measures.
D
ATA LOGGER
A micro-power small board computer (TFX-11, Onset
Computer, 1997) was used as the data collection device
(fig. 5). The TFX-11 specifications included a small size
(8.1 cm × 5.33 cm × 1.27 cm), 12-bit A/D converter, built
in real-time clock, 512 k of EEPROM and an ultra low
power mode. These specifications met the requirements for
the RR monitor data capture device. The TFX-11 was
equipped with 0.1 in. headers for electrical connection to
an interface board. The user was responsible for
development of the interface board for their application. An
interface board was designed based on the prototype unit
using a CAD (SuperPCB for Windows™, Mental
Automation Inc.) circuit board design program. All
communication and analog signals connected to the TFX-
11 through the interface board with all signal conditioning
and logger power switching handled on the interface board.
The complete RR data logging system is shown in figure 6.
724 TRANSACTIONS OF THE ASAE
Figure 1–A force transducer (center) (8.9 newton) is attached to an
acrylic cylinder (left). A second cylinder (right) acts as a pressure
point. Electrical contact is made to brass contacts with conductive
adhesive provided on the transducer.
Figure 2–Detail of the two acrylic cylinders with assembly hardware.
Figure 3–The cylinders are free to move in the aluminum tube; any
pull of either of the attach points results in compression against the
transducer element.
 se 1808 ms 7/9/01 9:39 AM Page 724

--- Page 3 ---
RESPIRATION MONITOR SUPPORT SOFTWARE
Programming the TFX-11 using a modified BASIC
programming language was accomplished via a
development program (Onset Computer Corp., Pocasset,
Mass.). Onset Computer provided specialized commands
that performed routine tasks such as data acquisition and
time functions. The data logger program was written to
support RR signal logging bursts at user defined intervals.
The logging bursts logged respiration sensor outputs every
0.1 s. Figure 7 shows a sample RR data output for a one
minute burst. The data were stored in binary format in the
on-board EEPROM and offloaded as binary data. The
TFX-11 EEPROM memory was sufficient for collection of
RR data over a four-day collection span with 1 min bursts
acquired every 15 min.
A second program converted the data from binary to text
format. The data was processed by a Visual Basic™
program that transformed the text RR data into graphical
format for analysis. The program calculated the RR based
on the entire record for each 1 min interval by counting
reversals of direction of the transducer signal. The operator
had the option of either accepting the 1 min record, without
change, or selecting a more representative portion of the
data-set. Figure 7 illustrates the importance of operator
access to the full records. The RR sensor responded not
only to motion due to breathing but also to any flank
movement such as from stretching, swatting flies, etc. The
computer generated RR count for the full record in figure 7
resulted in a value of 58 breaths per minute (BPM); when
subsections were examined the values ranged from 66 to
68 BPM. The process of manually interpreting the data
required about 4-5 min per 24-h period per animal. A
program was written to automate the data reduction
process. Human interpretation and the automated system
were compared for 363 RR records from the USMARC
chamber study. Overall the automated system yielded RR
values that were on average within ± 3.7 BPM of the
human system. Of the 363 RR records examined about
10% (35) had RR that deviated by more than 10 BPM. The
deviation was thought to be due to animal movement, loose
belts or noisy sensors. The value of having full RR files
725VOL. 43(3): 723-728
Figure 4–The sensor is held in place on the animal by using two
lightweight bungee cords to span the abdominal circumference.
Figure 5–A micro-power small-board computer (right) is used as the
data collection device. The interface board (left) provides signal
conditioning and power control for the data logging application.
Figure 6–Complete data logging system as used in the studies
described in this report.
Figure 7–Sample of respiration data collected from a steer during a 1
min burst. Sample frequency was 10 records/s.
 se 1808 ms 7/9/01 9:39 AM Page 725

--- Page 4 ---
reviewed by a human operator rather than on-board data
reduction was apparent in these cases.
ENVIRONMENTAL CHAMBER AND FIELD STUDIES
The RR monitors were tested during two laboratory
studies and one field study. The first study was conducted at
the UMC Brody Environmental Laboratory using
eight crossbred Bos taurus heifers as part of an evaluation of
energy budgets during heat challenges. Physiological
measures included rectal temperature and RR. The heifers
began the experiment (day 1) in an environment of 18°C at
approximately 50% relative humidity (RH). The temperature
was increased for each successive day (28 ± 1°C on day 2, 30
± 1°C on day 3, and 32 ± 1°C on day 4) with RH remaining
at approximately 50%. Two heifers from each chamber were
equipped with USMARC RR monitors for the duration of the
study, with RR measures four times each hour for a duration
of 1 min (samples taken every 0.1 s).
A second study, conducted in the USMARC
Environmental Laboratory, focused on the impact of heat
waves on dynamics of feeder cattle thermoregulatory
response. The protocol imposed simulated heat waves on
the eight steers in the study with physiological measures of
RR, feed intake, and body temperature being recorded
during the 79-day experimental period. The simulated heat
waves were based on actual dry bulb and dewpoint
conditions that occurred in Rockport, Missouri, during July
1995, and Central City, Nebraska, during July-August
1997. This study also used USMARC RR monitors on each
of the eight steers assigned to this study. Respiration rates
were measured four times per hour for a duration of 1 min
with samples taken every 0.1 s.
A third study was conducted at the UMC Beef Research
and Teaching Center using 10 crossbred Bos taurus steers.
This was an outdoor study to assess thermoregulatory
responses (RR and implanted body temperature telemetry
devices) in shade and no-shade conditions. The late July
study included the installation of USMARC RR monitors
on four steers that were placed in shaded or unshaded pens
(individually penned). The short-term (four-day) study
called for the steers to rotate from shaded pens to unshaded
pens on alternate days. The remaining steers were group
penned in other shaded and unshaded pens. Again, RR was
measured four times per hour for a duration of 1 min with
samples taken every 0.1 s.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The following results and discussion for the studies are
presented to demonstrate the efficacy of the RR monitors to
measure this important physiological parameter. This
section is not intended to be a summary of all of the
experimental results nor does this section explore all of the
ramifications of the physiology involved.
Prior to experimental studies the RR monitors were
evaluated on test animals with respiration rate determined
both by the RR monitor and manual counting of flank
movement; the initial tests resulted in RR that agreed
within 2-3 BPM.
E
NVIRONMENTAL CHAMBER STUDIES
Representative data from the first study that was
conducted at the UMC Brody Environmental Laboratory are
shown for one of the experimental animals in figure 8. The
impact of environmental temperature is evident in figure 8.
The RR for the 18°C temperature had a mean value of 39
± 8 BPM. Following the imposition of heat stress the RR
increased to a mean value of 71 ± 14, 79 ± 17, and
81 ± 14 BPM, respectively, for the environments of 28, 30,
and 32°C. Using RR data for all chamber temperatures for
this heifer, a straight line fit was found with a change of
approximately 3.0 ± 0.14 BPM for each °C change
(BPM/C
Ta) in the range of ambient temperatures represented
(fig. 9). The correlation (Pearson correlation coefficient, SAS,
1985) of RR to temperature change was 0.73 (P < 0.01). The
RR monitors performed well in this experiment with only
two minor problems, maintaining tension on the belt,
and transducer attachment wire breakage, requiring attention.
The attachment wires were strengthened as a result of this
experiment and a belt tension protocol was established.
726 TRANSACTIONS OF THE ASAE
Figure 8–Respiration rate responses of a Bos taurus heifer to
chamber temperature (Missouri study).
Figure 9–Respiration rate versus chamber temperature for a Bos
taurus heifer (Missouri study). Straight line fit to data shows
approximately 3.0 respiration per minute change for a 1.0°C
temperature change in this range of temperatures.
 se 1808 ms 7/9/01 9:39 AM Page 726

--- Page 5 ---
The second study, conducted in the USMARC
Environmental Laboratory, focused on the impact of heat
waves on dynamics of feeder cattle thermoregulatory
response. Figure 10 shows RR responses to environmental
conditions during a 14-day portion of the data-set for a
representative animal. The heat wave cycles are clearly
evident as the RR tracks the chamber temperature closely.
The average value of RR and the variability of RR was
greater (78 ± 26 BP M/heat stress compared with 45 ±
16 BPM/thermoneutral) during the imposition of the
simulated heat wave as compared with the cyclic
thermoneutral temperature (18 ± 7°C) following the heat
wave. A straight line fit (fig. 11) to the ambient temperature
versus RR data showed a change of approximately 2.2
± 0.1 BPM/C
Ta for this animal under the imposed
conditions. The correlation of RR to temperature change
was 0.64 (P < 0.01). Tests of the RR monitors resulted in
minor software and hardware changes. A signal conditioner
for the force transducer was implemented in the new
design to provide more sensitivity over a wider range of
respiration conditions. Also, additional checks were written
in the software startup program to ensure erasure of the
computer EEPROM; the data was overwritten on one
occasion when the previous data had not been fully erased.
F
IELD STUDY
The field study conducted at the UMC Beef Research
and Teaching Center assessed thermoregulatory responses
(RR and implanted body temperature telemetry devices) to
shade and no-shade conditions during a hot summer
727VOL. 43(3): 723-728
Figure 10–Respiration rate responses of a Bos taurus steer to
chamber temperature (USMARC study).
Figure 11–Respiration rate versus chamber temperature for a Bos
taurus steer (USMARC study). Straight line fit to data shows
approximately 2.2 respiration per minute change for a 1.0°C
temperature change in this range of temperatures.
Figure 12–Respiration rate, body temperature, and ambient
temperature for the period of the UMC field study for a
representative steer (sun, days 208 and 210; shade, days 209 and 211).
Figure 13–Respiration rate as a function of ambient temperature
during shade and no-shade exposures (data taken from 10:00 A.M.
through 3:00 P.M. each day) for the same steer.
 se 1808 ms 7/9/01 9:39 AM Page 727

--- Page 6 ---
environment. Respiration rate, body temperature, and
ambient temperature are shown in figure 12 for the period
of the study for one representative steer. Figure 13 shows
RR as a function of ambient temperature for both shade
and no-shade conditions (data taken from 10:00 
A.M.
through 3:00 P.M. each day) for the same steer. The
correlation of the no-shade ambient temperature and RR
was significant (P < 0.01, R = 0.77) with a linear rate of
change of 6.4 ± 0.8 BPM/C
Ta. By comparison, RR was
weakly correlated with ambient temperature in the shaded
period (P = 0.06, R = 0.37) and showed a linear rate of
change of 1.6B ± 0.8 BPM/C
Ta for this animal. Respiration
rate as a function of body temperature is shown in figure
14 for this steer in shade and no-shade conditions (data
taken from 10:00 
A.M. through 3:00 P.M. each day).
Respiration rate was significantly (P < 0.01, R = 0.49)
correlated to body temperature changes with an
approximate 18 ± 6 BPM change for each 1°C change of
body temperature for this animal in the sun. The body
temperature did not correlate with RR in the shade (P >
0.09) for this animal.
SUMMARY
Rugged respiration monitors for cattle were designed
and tested. Three separate studies demonstrated the value
of the automated measurement in evaluating the
physiological condition of the animals in both laboratory
and field conditions. The respiration monitoring system
performed well and with the experience gained from initial
tests an improved version should prove very useful in
future experiments and production settings.
A
CKNOWLEDGMENTS . The authors would like to
acknowledge the dedicated effort that was provided by
John Holman on the mechanical aspects of this project as
well as Diane Purcell’s contribution to software
applications related to this work. Additionally, animal
management assistance was provided by John Holman,
Bruce Larsen, and Michael Leonard.
REFERENCES
BIOPAC Systems Inc. 1997. MP100 Catalog. Santa Barbara, Calif.
Data Science International. 1996. Telemetry Times10(3): 1.
Garrett, W. N., T. E. Bond, and N. Pereira. 1967. Influence of
shade height on physiological responses of cattle during hot
weather. Transactions of the ASAE10(4): 433-434, 438.
Hahn, G. L. 1976. Shelter engineering for cattle and other
domestic animals. In Progress in Animal Biometeorology, ed.
H. D. Johnson. V ol. 1: 496-503. Amsterdam, The Netherlands:
Swets & Zeitlinger, B.V .
Hahn, G. L., A. M. Parkhurst, and J. B. Gaughan. 1997. Cattle
respiration rate as a function of ambient temperature. ASAE
Paper No. MC97-121. St. Joseph, Mich.: ASAE.
Hahn, G. L. 1998. Personal communication. USMARC.
Webster, A. J. F. 1973. In Heat Loss from Animals and Man, eds. J.
L. Monteith, and L. E. Mount, Ch. 10: 205-231. London,
England: Butterworth.
Ingram, D. L., and L. E. Mount. 1975. In Man and Animals in Hot
Environments, ed. K. E. Schaefer, Ch. 2: 19-31. New York,
N.Y .: Springer-Verlag.
Kibler, H. H., and S. Brody. 1949. Influence of temperature, 50 to
5F and 50 to 95F, on heat production and cardiorespiratory
activities in Brahman, Jersey and Holstein cows. Res Bul 450
(Envron. Physio. and Shelter Eng. Series VII). Columbia, Mo.:
Missouri Agric. Exp. Sta., Univ. of Missouri. 
Morrison, S., and G. Lofgreen. 1979. Beef cattle response to air
temperature. Transactions of the ASAE22(4): 861-862, 872.
Monteith, J. L. 1973. In Heat Loss from Animals and Man,eds. J.
L. Monteith, and L. E. Mount, Ch. 1: 1-17. London, England:
Butterworth.
Onset Computer Corp. 1997. TFX-11 Remote Datalogger/
Controller Engine Users’ s Guide.Pocasset, Mass.
Uniforce Technical Notes and Sensor Design Guide. 1995.
Chicago, Ill.: Force Imaging Technologies.
SAS Institute. 1985. SAS User’ s Guide. Cary, N.C.: SAS Institute.
Webster, A. J. F. 1973. Heat loss from cattle with particular emphasis
on the effects of cold. In Heat Loss from Animals and Man, eds. J.
L. Monteith, and L. E. Mount, 205-231. Proc., 20th Easter School
in Agric. Sci. London, England: Butterworths.
ABBREVIATIONS
USMARC = U.S. Meat Animal Research Center
RR = respiration rate
T
a = ambient temperature
RH = relative humidity
UMC = University of Missouri at Columbia
BPM = breaths per minute
728 TRANSACTIONS OF THE ASAE
Figure 14–Respiration rate as a function of body temperature for the
shade and no-shade conditions (data taken from 10:00 A.M. through
3:00 P.M. each day) for the same steer.
 se 1808 ms 7/9/01 9:39 AM Page 728